docs/src/content/docs/guide/context-data.mdx, before:

---
title: Context Data
description: Include additional debugging information with assertions
---

When assertions run in loops or complex scenarios, it's helpful to know exactly which iteration or condition caused a failure. fluent-asserts provides two features for attaching context data to assertions.

## Format-Style `because`

The `because` method now supports printf-style format strings, making it easy to include dynamic values in your failure messages:

```d
import fluent.asserts;

unittest {
    foreach (i; 0 .. 100) {
        auto result = computeValue(i);
        result.should.equal(expected).because("At iteration %s", i);
    }
}
```

On failure, you'll see:
```
Because At iteration 42, result should equal expected.
```

### Multiple Format Arguments

You can include multiple values:

```d
result.should.equal(expected).because("iteration %s of %s with seed %s", i, total, seed);
```

### Format Specifiers

Standard D format specifiers work:

```d
value.should.equal(0).because("value %.2f exceeded threshold", floatValue);
value.should.beTrue.because("flags: 0x%08X", bitmask);
```

## Context Attachment with `withContext`

For more structured debugging data, use `withContext` to attach key-value pairs:

```d
import fluent.asserts;

unittest {
    foreach (userId; userIds) {
        auto user = fetchUser(userId);

        user.isActive.should.beTrue
            .withContext("userId", userId)
            .withContext("email", user.email);
    }
}
```

### Chaining Multiple Contexts

You can chain multiple `withContext` calls:

```d
result.should.equal(expected)
    .withContext("iteration", i)
    .withContext("input", testInput)
    .withContext("config", configName);
```

### Context in Output

Context data is displayed differently based on the output format:

**Verbose format:**
```
ASSERTION FAILED: result should equal expected.
OPERATION: equal

CONTEXT:
  userId = 42
  email = test@example.com

  ACTUAL: <bool> false
EXPECTED: <bool> true
```

**Compact format:**
```
FAIL: result should equal expected. | context: userId=42, email=test@example.com | actual=false expected=true | test.d:15
```

**TAP format:**
```
not ok - result should equal expected.
  ---
  context:
    userId: 42
    email: test@example.com
  actual: false
  expected: true
  at: test.d:15
  ...
```

## Combining Both Features

You can use `because` and `withContext` together:

```d
result.should.equal(expected)
    .because("validation failed for user %s", userId)
    .withContext("email", user.email)
    .withContext("role", user.role);
```

## Use Cases

### Loop Debugging

```d
foreach (i, testCase; testCases) {
    auto result = process(testCase.input);
    result.should.equal(testCase.expected)
        .withContext("index", i)
        .withContext("input", testCase.input);
}
```

### Parameterized Tests

```d
static foreach (config; testConfigurations) {
    unittest {
        auto result = runWith(config);
        result.isValid.should.beTrue
            .withContext("config", config.name)
            .withContext("timeout", config.timeout);
    }
}
```

### Multi-Threaded Tests

```d
import std.parallelism;

foreach (task; parallel(tasks)) {
    auto result = task.execute();
    result.should.equal(task.expected)
        .withContext("taskId", task.id)
        .withContext("thread", thisThreadId);
}
```

### Complex Object Validation

```d
void validateOrder(Order order) {
    order.total.should.beGreaterThan(0)
        .withContext("orderId", order.id)
        .withContext("customer", order.customerId)
        .withContext("items", order.items.length);

    order.status.should.equal(Status.pending)
        .withContext("orderId", order.id)
        .withContext("createdAt", order.createdAt.toISOString);
}
```

## Limits

- Context is limited to 8 key-value pairs per assertion
- Keys and values are converted to strings using `std.conv.to!string`
- Context is cleared between assertions

## Next Steps

- Learn about [Configuration](/guide/configuration/) for output format options
- See [Assertion Styles](/guide/assertion-styles/) for different ways to write assertions
- Explore [Core Concepts](/guide/core-concepts/) for understanding the assertion lifecycle

Commit message:

feat: Upgrade fluent-asserts to v2.0 with major architectural changes
- Refactor evaluation logic to use structs for better performance and memory management.
- Transition from GC-based string serialization to HeapString for @nogc compatibility.
- Update import paths for operations and serializers to reflect new module structure.
- Enhance custom operation and serializer registration processes.
- Introduce new features including centralized configuration, multiple output formats, and context data for assertions.
- Improve assertion failure messages and statistics tracking.
- Add migration guide for users upgrading from v1.x to v2.0.

docs/src/content/docs/guide/context-data.mdx, after:

---
title: Context Data
description: Include additional debugging information with assertions
---

When assertions run in loops or complex scenarios, it's helpful to know exactly which iteration or condition caused a failure. fluent-asserts provides two features for attaching context data to assertions.

## Format-Style `because`

The `because` method now supports printf-style format strings, making it easy to include dynamic values in your failure messages:

```d
import fluent.asserts;

unittest {
    foreach (i; 0 .. 100) {
        auto result = computeValue(i);
        result.should.equal(expected).because("At iteration %s", i);
    }
}
```

On failure, you'll see:
```
Because At iteration 42, result should equal expected.
```

### Multiple Format Arguments

You can include multiple values:

```d
result.should.equal(expected).because("iteration %s of %s with seed %s", i, total, seed);
```

### Format Specifiers

Standard D format specifiers work:

```d
value.should.equal(0).because("value %.2f exceeded threshold", floatValue);
value.should.beTrue.because("flags: 0x%08X", bitmask);
```

## Context Attachment with `withContext`

For more structured debugging data, use `withContext` to attach key-value pairs:

```d
import fluent.asserts;

unittest {
    foreach (userId; userIds) {
        auto user = fetchUser(userId);

        user.isActive.should.beTrue
            .withContext("userId", userId)
            .withContext("email", user.email);
    }
}
```

### Chaining Multiple Contexts

You can chain multiple `withContext` calls:

```d
result.should.equal(expected)
    .withContext("iteration", i)
    .withContext("input", testInput)
    .withContext("config", configName);
```

### Context in Output

Context data is displayed differently based on the output format:

**Verbose format:**
```
ASSERTION FAILED: result should equal expected.
OPERATION: equal

CONTEXT:
  userId = 42
  email = test@example.com

  ACTUAL: <bool> false
EXPECTED: <bool> true
```

**Compact format:**
```
FAIL: result should equal expected. | context: userId=42, email=test@example.com | actual=false expected=true | test.d:15
```

**TAP format:**
```
not ok - result should equal expected.
  ---
  context:
    userId: 42
    email: test@example.com
  actual: false
  expected: true
  at: test.d:15
  ...
```

## Combining Both Features

You can use `because` and `withContext` together:

```d
result.should.equal(expected)
    .because("validation failed for user %s", userId)
    .withContext("email", user.email)
    .withContext("role", user.role);
```

## Use Cases

### Loop Debugging

```d
foreach (i, testCase; testCases) {
    auto result = process(testCase.input);
    result.should.equal(testCase.expected)
        .withContext("index", i)
        .withContext("input", testCase.input);
}
```

### Parameterized Tests

```d
static foreach (config; testConfigurations) {
    unittest {
        auto result = runWith(config);
        result.isValid.should.beTrue
            .withContext("config", config.name)
            .withContext("timeout", config.timeout);
    }
}
```

### Multi-Threaded Tests

```d
import std.parallelism;

foreach (task; parallel(tasks)) {
    auto result = task.execute();
    result.should.equal(task.expected)
        .withContext("taskId", task.id)
        .withContext("thread", thisThreadId);
}
```

### Complex Object Validation

```d
void validateOrder(Order order) {
    order.total.should.beGreaterThan(0)
        .withContext("orderId", order.id)
        .withContext("customer", order.customerId)
        .withContext("items", order.items.length);

    order.status.should.equal(Status.pending)
        .withContext("orderId", order.id)
        .withContext("createdAt", order.createdAt.toISOString);
}
```

## Limits

- Context is limited to 8 key-value pairs per assertion (defined by `MAX_CONTEXT_ENTRIES`)
- Keys and values are converted to strings using `std.conv.to!string`
- Context is cleared between assertions
- If you exceed 8 context entries, a warning is displayed in the output indicating that additional entries were dropped

## Next Steps

- Learn about [Configuration](/guide/configuration/) for output format options
- See [Assertion Styles](/guide/assertion-styles/) for different ways to write assertions
- Explore [Core Concepts](/guide/core-concepts/) for understanding the assertion lifecycle
