docs/src/content/docs/guide/introduction.mdx, before:

---
title: Introduction
description: Fluent assertions for the D programming language
---

[Writing unit tests is easy with D](https://dlang.org/spec/unittest.html). The `unittest` block allows you to start writing tests and be productive with no special setup.

Unfortunately the [assert expression](https://dlang.org/spec/expression.html#AssertExpression) does not help you write expressive asserts, and when a failure occurs it's hard to understand why. **fluent-asserts** allows you to more naturally specify the expected outcome of a TDD or BDD-style test.

## Quick Start

Add the dependency:

```bash
dub add fluent-asserts
```

Write your first test:

```d
unittest {
    true.should.equal(false).because("this is a failing assert");
}

unittest {
    Assert.equal(true, false, "this is a failing assert");
}
```

Run the tests:

```bash
dub test
```

## The API

The library provides three ways to write assertions: `expect`, `should`, and `Assert`.

### expect

`expect` is the main assertion function. It takes a value to test and returns a fluent assertion object.

```d
expect(testedValue).to.equal(42);
```

Use `not` to negate and `because` to add context:

```d
expect(testedValue).to.not.equal(42);
expect(true).to.equal(false).because("of test reasons");
// Output: Because of test reasons, true should equal `false`.
```

### should

`should` works with [UFCS](https://dlang.org/spec/function.html#pseudo-member) for a more natural reading style. It's an alias for `expect`:

```d
// These are equivalent
testedValue.should.equal(42);
expect(testedValue).to.equal(42);
```

### Assert

`Assert` provides a traditional assertion syntax:

```d
// These are equivalent
expect(testedValue).to.equal(42);
Assert.equal(testedValue, 42);

// Negate with "not" prefix
Assert.notEqual(testedValue, 42);
```

## Recording Evaluations

The `recordEvaluation` function captures assertion results without throwing on failure. This is useful for testing assertion behavior or inspecting results programmatically.

```d
import fluentasserts.core.lifecycle : recordEvaluation;

unittest {
    auto evaluation = ({
        expect(5).to.equal(10);
    }).recordEvaluation;

    // Inspect the evaluation result
    assert(evaluation.result.expected == "10");
    assert(evaluation.result.actual == "5");
}
```

The `Evaluation.result` provides access to:
- `expected` - the expected value as a string
- `actual` - the actual value as a string
- `negated` - whether the assertion was negated with `.not`
- `missing` - array of missing elements (for collection comparisons)
- `extra` - array of extra elements (for collection comparisons)

## Custom Assert Handler

During unittest builds, the library automatically installs a custom handler for D's built-in `assert` statements. This provides fluent-asserts style error messages even when using standard `assert`:

```d
unittest {
    assert(1 == 2, "math is broken");
    // Output includes ACTUAL/EXPECTED formatting and source location
}
```

The handler is only active during `version(unittest)` builds. To temporarily disable it:

```d
import core.exception;

auto savedHandler = core.exception.assertHandler;
scope(exit) core.exception.assertHandler = savedHandler;
core.exception.assertHandler = null;
```

## Next Steps

- See the [Installation](/guide/installation/) guide for detailed setup
- Learn about [Assertion Styles](/guide/assertion-styles/) in depth
- Explore the [API Reference](/api/) for all available operations
- Understand the [Philosophy](/guide/philosophy/) behind fluent-asserts

Commit message:

feat: Add release build configuration details to documentation and improve assertion handling

docs/src/content/docs/guide/introduction.mdx, after:

---
title: Introduction
description: Fluent assertions for the D programming language
---

[Writing unit tests is easy with D](https://dlang.org/spec/unittest.html). The `unittest` block allows you to start writing tests and be productive with no special setup.

Unfortunately the [assert expression](https://dlang.org/spec/expression.html#AssertExpression) does not help you write expressive asserts, and when a failure occurs it's hard to understand why. **fluent-asserts** allows you to more naturally specify the expected outcome of a TDD or BDD-style test.

## Quick Start

Add the dependency:

```bash
dub add fluent-asserts
```

Write your first test:

```d
unittest {
    true.should.equal(false).because("this is a failing assert");
}

unittest {
    Assert.equal(true, false, "this is a failing assert");
}
```

Run the tests:

```bash
dub test
```

## The API

The library provides three ways to write assertions: `expect`, `should`, and `Assert`.

### expect

`expect` is the main assertion function. It takes a value to test and returns a fluent assertion object.

```d
expect(testedValue).to.equal(42);
```

Use `not` to negate and `because` to add context:

```d
expect(testedValue).to.not.equal(42);
expect(true).to.equal(false).because("of test reasons");
// Output: Because of test reasons, true should equal `false`.
```

### should

`should` works with [UFCS](https://dlang.org/spec/function.html#pseudo-member) for a more natural reading style. It's an alias for `expect`:

```d
// These are equivalent
testedValue.should.equal(42);
expect(testedValue).to.equal(42);
```

### Assert

`Assert` provides a traditional assertion syntax:

```d
// These are equivalent
expect(testedValue).to.equal(42);
Assert.equal(testedValue, 42);

// Negate with "not" prefix
Assert.notEqual(testedValue, 42);
```

## Recording Evaluations

The `recordEvaluation` function captures assertion results without throwing on failure. This is useful for testing assertion behavior or inspecting results programmatically.

```d
import fluentasserts.core.lifecycle : recordEvaluation;

unittest {
    auto evaluation = ({
        expect(5).to.equal(10);
    }).recordEvaluation;

    // Inspect the evaluation result
    assert(evaluation.result.expected == "10");
    assert(evaluation.result.actual == "5");
}
```

The `Evaluation.result` provides access to:
- `expected` - the expected value as a string
- `actual` - the actual value as a string
- `negated` - whether the assertion was negated with `.not`
- `missing` - array of missing elements (for collection comparisons)
- `extra` - array of extra elements (for collection comparisons)

## Release Builds

Like D's built-in `assert`, fluent-asserts assertions are disabled in release builds. This means you can use them in production code without runtime overhead:

```d
// In debug builds: assertion is checked
// In release builds: this is a no-op
expect(value).to.be.greaterThan(0);
```

See [Configuration](/guide/configuration/#release-build-configuration) for how to control this behavior.

## Custom Assert Handler

During unittest builds, the library automatically installs a custom handler for D's built-in `assert` statements. This provides fluent-asserts style error messages even when using standard `assert`:

```d
unittest {
    assert(1 == 2, "math is broken");
    // Output includes ACTUAL/EXPECTED formatting and source location
}
```

The handler is only active during `version(unittest)` builds. To temporarily disable it:

```d
import core.exception;

auto savedHandler = core.exception.assertHandler;
scope(exit) core.exception.assertHandler = savedHandler;
core.exception.assertHandler = null;
```

## Next Steps

- See the [Installation](/guide/installation/) guide for detailed setup
- Learn about [Assertion Styles](/guide/assertion-styles/) in depth
- Explore the [API Reference](/api/) for all available operations
- Understand the [Philosophy](/guide/philosophy/) behind fluent-asserts
