docs/src/content/docs/guide/memory-management.mdx, before:

---
title: Memory Management
description: How fluent-asserts manages memory in @nogc contexts
---

This guide explains how fluent-asserts handles memory allocation internally, particularly for `@nogc` compatibility. Understanding these concepts is essential if you're extending the library or debugging memory-related issues.

## Why Manual Memory Management?

Fluent-asserts aims to work in `@nogc` contexts, which means it cannot use D's garbage collector for dynamic allocations. This is achieved through:

1. **Fixed-size arrays** (`FixedArray`, `FixedAppender`) for bounded data
2. **Heap-allocated arrays** (`HeapData`, `HeapString`) for unbounded data with reference counting

## HeapData and HeapString

`HeapData!T` is a dynamic array using `malloc`/`free` instead of the GC, with two key optimizations:

1. **Small Buffer Optimization (SBO)**: Short data is stored inline without heap allocation
2. **Combined Allocation**: Reference count is stored with the data in a single allocation

```d
/// Heap-allocated dynamic array with ref-counting and small buffer optimization.
struct HeapData(T) {
    private union Payload {
        T[SBO_SIZE] small;      // Inline storage for small data
        HeapPayload* heap;       // Pointer to heap allocation
    }
    private Payload _payload;
    private size_t _length;
    private ubyte _flags;        // Bit 0: isHeap flag
}

alias HeapString = HeapData!char;
```

### Small Buffer Optimization

HeapData stores small amounts of data directly in the struct without any heap allocation:

- **x86-64**: Up to ~47 characters stored inline (64-byte cache line)
- **ARM64** (Apple M1/M2): Up to ~111 characters stored inline (128-byte cache line)

This dramatically reduces allocations for short strings and improves cache locality.

```d
auto hs = toHeapString("hello");  // Stored inline, no malloc!
assert(hs.refCount() == 0);        // SBO doesn't use ref counting

auto long_str = toHeapString("a]".repeat(100).join);  // Heap allocated
assert(long_str.refCount() == 1);  // Heap data has ref count
```

### Creating HeapStrings

```d
// From a string literal
auto hs = toHeapString("hello world");

// Using create() for manual control
auto hs2 = HeapString.create(100);  // Initial capacity of 100
hs2.put("data");

// create() with small capacity uses SBO
auto hs3 = HeapString.create();     // Uses small buffer
```

### Reference Counting

HeapData uses reference counting for **heap-allocated** data only. Small buffer data is copied independently:

```d
// Small buffer - copies are independent
auto a = toHeapString("hi");     // SBO, refCount = 0
auto b = a;                       // Independent copy
b.put("!");                       // Only b is modified
assert(a[] == "hi");              // a unchanged
assert(b[] == "hi!");

// Heap allocation - copies share data
auto x = toHeapString("x".repeat(200).join);  // Forces heap
auto y = x;                       // Shares reference, refCount = 2
assert(x.refCount() == 2);
```

### Combined Allocation

The reference count is stored at the start of the heap allocation, followed by the data:

```d
private struct HeapPayload {
    size_t refCount;
    size_t capacity;
    // Data follows immediately after...

    T* dataPtr() {
        return cast(T*)(cast(void*)&this + HeapPayload.sizeof);
    }
}
```

This means heap allocation requires only **one malloc call** instead of two (compared to the old implementation).

## The Postblit Solution

fluent-asserts uses D's **postblit constructor** (`this(this)`) to handle blit operations automatically. Postblit is called **after** D performs a blit, allowing us to fix up reference counts:

```d
struct HeapData(T) {
    /// Postblit - called after D blits this struct.
    /// For heap data: increments ref count.
    /// For small buffer: nothing to do (data already copied).
    this(this) @trusted @nogc nothrow {
        if (isHeap() && _payload.heap) {
            _payload.heap.refCount++;
        }
    }
}
```

### How Postblit Works

1. D performs blit (memcpy) of the struct
2. D calls `this(this)` on the new copy
3. For heap data: postblit increments the reference count
4. For SBO data: nothing needed (blit already copied the inline data)

This happens automatically - **you don't need to call any special methods** when returning HeapString or structs containing HeapString from functions.

### Nested Structs

When a struct contains members with postblit constructors, D automatically calls postblit on each member - **no explicit postblit is needed** in the containing struct:

```d
struct ValueEvaluation {
    HeapString strValue;   // Has postblit
    HeapString niceValue;  // Has postblit
    HeapString fileName;   // Has postblit
    HeapString prependText; // Has postblit

    // No explicit postblit needed!
    // D automatically calls the postblit for each HeapString field
    // when ValueEvaluation is blitted
}
```

## String Concatenation

HeapData supports concatenation operators for convenient string building:

```d
auto hs = toHeapString("hello");

// Create new HeapData with combined content
auto result = hs ~ " world";
assert(result[] == "hello world");
assert(hs[] == "hello");  // Original unchanged

// Append in place
hs ~= " world";
assert(hs[] == "hello world");

// Concatenate two HeapData instances
auto a = toHeapString("foo");
auto b = toHeapString("bar");
auto c = a ~ b;
assert(c[] == "foobar");
```

## Legacy: incrementRefCount()

For edge cases, the `incrementRefCount()` method is still available:

```d
/// Manually increment ref count (for edge cases)
/// Note: Only affects heap-allocated data, not SBO
void incrementRefCount() @trusted @nogc nothrow {
    if (isHeap() && _payload.heap) {
        _payload.heap.refCount++;
    }
}
```

In most cases, you should **not need to call this method** - the postblit constructor handles everything automatically.

## Memory Initialization

HeapData zero-initializes allocated memory using `memset`. This prevents garbage values in uninitialized struct fields from causing issues:

```d
static HeapData create(size_t initialCapacity = 0) @trusted @nogc nothrow {
    HeapData h;
    h._flags = 0;   // Ensure flags are initialized
    h._length = 0;

    if (initialCapacity > SBO_SIZE) {
        h._payload.heap = HeapPayload.create(cap);
        h.setHeap(true);
    }
    // Otherwise uses SBO - no allocation needed

    return h;
}
```

## Assignment Operator

HeapData provides a single assignment operator that handles both lvalue and rvalue assignments efficiently:

```d
void opAssign(HeapData rhs) @trusted @nogc nothrow {
    // Decrement old ref count and free if needed
    if (isHeap() && _payload.heap) {
        if (--_payload.heap.refCount == 0) {
            free(_payload.heap);
        }
    }

    // Take ownership from rhs (rhs was copied via postblit)
    _length = rhs._length;
    _flags = rhs._flags;

    if (rhs.isHeap()) {
        _payload.heap = rhs._payload.heap;
        rhs._payload.heap = null;  // Prevent rhs destructor from freeing
        rhs.setHeap(false);
    } else {
        _payload.small = rhs._payload.small;  // Copy SBO data
    }
}
```

When called with an lvalue, D invokes the postblit constructor on `rhs` first, incrementing the ref count. The assignment then takes ownership of the copied reference. This unified approach keeps the code simpler while handling all cases correctly.

## Accessing HeapString Content

Use the slice operator `[]` to get a `const(char)[]` from a HeapString:

```d
HeapString hs = toHeapString("hello");

// Get slice for use with string functions
const(char)[] slice = hs[];

// Pass to functions expecting const(char)[]
writeln(hs[]);
```

## Comparing HeapStrings

HeapData provides `opEquals` for convenient comparisons without needing the slice operator:

```d
HeapString hs = toHeapString("hello");

// Direct comparison with string literal
if (hs == "hello") { /* ... */ }

// Comparison with another HeapString
HeapString hs2 = toHeapString("hello");
if (hs == hs2) { /* ... */ }

// Negation works too
if (hs != "world") { /* ... */ }
```

## Best Practices

1. **Use slice operator `[]`** to access HeapString content for functions expecting `const(char)[]`
2. **Prefer FixedArray** when the maximum size is known at compile time
3. **Let SBO work for you** - short strings are automatically optimized
4. **Use `isValid()` in debug assertions** to catch memory corruption early

```d
// Access content with slice operator
HeapString hs = toHeapString("hello");
writeln(hs[]);  // Use [] to get const(char)[]

// Compare directly (opEquals implemented)
if (hs == "hello") { /* ... */ }

// Use concatenation for building strings
auto result = toHeapString("Error: ") ~ message ~ " at line " ~ lineNum;

// Debug validation
assert(hs.isValid(), "HeapString memory corruption detected");
```

### What You Don't Need to Do

With the current implementation, you **don't need to**:
- Call `incrementRefCount()` before returning structs (postblit handles this)
- Write explicit postblit or copy constructors for structs containing HeapString (D calls nested postblits automatically)
- Write explicit assignment operators for structs containing HeapString (D handles this)
- Worry about heap allocation for short strings (SBO handles this)
- Make two allocations for ref count and data (combined allocation)
- Manually track reference counts when passing structs through containers

## Debugging Memory Issues

If you encounter heap corruption or use-after-free:

1. **Enable debug mode**: Compile with `-version=DebugHeapData` for extra validation
2. **Use `isValid()` checks**: Add assertions to catch corruption early
3. **Check struct literals**: Replace with field-by-field assignment
4. **Verify initialization**: Ensure HeapData is properly initialized before use
5. **Check `refCount()`**: Use the debug method to inspect reference counts (returns 0 for SBO)

### Debug Mode Features

When compiled with `-version=DebugHeapData`, HeapData includes:
- Double-free detection (asserts if ref count already zero)
- Corruption detection (asserts if ref count impossibly high)
- Creation tracking for debugging lifecycle issues

```d
// Enable debug checks
HeapString hs = toHeapString("test");
assert(hs.isValid(), "HeapString is corrupted");

// Check if using heap (refCount > 0) or SBO (refCount == 0)
if (hs.refCount() > 0) {
    // Heap allocated
} else {
    // Using small buffer optimization
}
```

### Common Symptoms

- Crashes in `malloc`/`free`
- Invalid pointer values like `0x6`, `0xa`, `0xc`
- Double-free errors
- Use-after-free (reading garbage data)
- Assertion failures in debug mode

## Architecture-Specific Details

HeapData adapts to different CPU architectures for optimal cache performance:

| Architecture | Cache Line | SBO Size (chars) | Min Heap Capacity |
|--------------|------------|------------------|-------------------|
| x86-64       | 64 bytes   | ~47              | 64                |
| x86 (32-bit) | 64 bytes   | ~47              | 64                |
| ARM64        | 128 bytes  | ~111             | 128               |
| ARM (32-bit) | 32 bytes   | ~15              | 32                |

## Next Steps

- Review the [Core Concepts](/guide/core-concepts/) for understanding the evaluation pipeline
- See [Extending](/guide/extending/) for adding custom operations

Commit message:

docs: Update documentation for clarity on memory management and @nogc compatibility

docs/src/content/docs/guide/memory-management.mdx, after:

---
title: Memory Management
description: How fluent-asserts manages memory internally
---

This guide explains how fluent-asserts handles memory allocation internally. Understanding these concepts is essential if you're extending the library or debugging memory-related issues.

## Why Manual Memory Management?

Fluent-asserts uses manual memory management internally to minimize GC pressure during test execution. While the library itself cannot be called from `@nogc` code (due to exception handling requirements), the internal data structures are designed to avoid triggering garbage collection in hot paths. This is achieved through:

1. **Fixed-size arrays** (`FixedArray`, `FixedAppender`) for bounded data
2. **Heap-allocated arrays** (`HeapData`, `HeapString`) for unbounded data with reference counting

## HeapData and HeapString

`HeapData!T` is a dynamic array using `malloc`/`free` instead of the GC, with two key optimizations:

1. **Small Buffer Optimization (SBO)**: Short data is stored inline without heap allocation
2. **Combined Allocation**: Reference count is stored with the data in a single allocation

```d
/// Heap-allocated dynamic array with ref-counting and small buffer optimization.
struct HeapData(T) {
    private union Payload {
        T[SBO_SIZE] small;      // Inline storage for small data
        HeapPayload* heap;       // Pointer to heap allocation
    }
    private Payload _payload;
    private size_t _length;
    private ubyte _flags;        // Bit 0: isHeap flag
}

alias HeapString = HeapData!char;
```

### Small Buffer Optimization

HeapData stores small amounts of data directly in the struct without any heap allocation:

- **x86-64**: Up to ~47 characters stored inline (64-byte cache line)
- **ARM64** (Apple M1/M2): Up to ~111 characters stored inline (128-byte cache line)

This dramatically reduces allocations for short strings and improves cache locality.

```d
auto hs = toHeapString("hello");  // Stored inline, no malloc!
assert(hs.refCount() == 0);        // SBO doesn't use ref counting

auto long_str = toHeapString("a]".repeat(100).join);  // Heap allocated
assert(long_str.refCount() == 1);  // Heap data has ref count
```

### Creating HeapStrings

```d
// From a string literal
auto hs = toHeapString("hello world");

// Using create() for manual control
auto hs2 = HeapString.create(100);  // Initial capacity of 100
hs2.put("data");

// create() with small capacity uses SBO
auto hs3 = HeapString.create();     // Uses small buffer
```

### Reference Counting

HeapData uses reference counting for **heap-allocated** data only. Small buffer data is copied independently:

```d
// Small buffer - copies are independent
auto a = toHeapString("hi");     // SBO, refCount = 0
auto b = a;                       // Independent copy
b.put("!");                       // Only b is modified
assert(a[] == "hi");              // a unchanged
assert(b[] == "hi!");

// Heap allocation - copies share data
auto x = toHeapString("x".repeat(200).join);  // Forces heap
auto y = x;                       // Shares reference, refCount = 2
assert(x.refCount() == 2);
```

### Combined Allocation

The reference count is stored at the start of the heap allocation, followed by the data:

```d
private struct HeapPayload {
    size_t refCount;
    size_t capacity;
    // Data follows immediately after...

    T* dataPtr() {
        return cast(T*)(cast(void*)&this + HeapPayload.sizeof);
    }
}
```

This means heap allocation requires only **one malloc call** instead of two (compared to the old implementation).

## The Postblit Solution

fluent-asserts uses D's **postblit constructor** (`this(this)`) to handle blit operations automatically. Postblit is called **after** D performs a blit, allowing us to fix up reference counts:

```d
struct HeapData(T) {
    /// Postblit - called after D blits this struct.
    /// For heap data: increments ref count.
    /// For small buffer: nothing to do (data already copied).
    this(this) @trusted @nogc nothrow {
        if (isHeap() && _payload.heap) {
            _payload.heap.refCount++;
        }
    }
}
```

### How Postblit Works

1. D performs blit (memcpy) of the struct
2. D calls `this(this)` on the new copy
3. For heap data: postblit increments the reference count
4. For SBO data: nothing needed (blit already copied the inline data)

This happens automatically - **you don't need to call any special methods** when returning HeapString or structs containing HeapString from functions.

### Nested Structs

When a struct contains members with postblit constructors, D automatically calls postblit on each member - **no explicit postblit is needed** in the containing struct:

```d
struct ValueEvaluation {
    HeapString strValue;   // Has postblit
    HeapString niceValue;  // Has postblit
    HeapString fileName;   // Has postblit
    HeapString prependText; // Has postblit

    // No explicit postblit needed!
    // D automatically calls the postblit for each HeapString field
    // when ValueEvaluation is blitted
}
```

## String Concatenation

HeapData supports concatenation operators for convenient string building:

```d
auto hs = toHeapString("hello");

// Create new HeapData with combined content
auto result = hs ~ " world";
assert(result[] == "hello world");
assert(hs[] == "hello");  // Original unchanged

// Append in place
hs ~= " world";
assert(hs[] == "hello world");

// Concatenate two HeapData instances
auto a = toHeapString("foo");
auto b = toHeapString("bar");
auto c = a ~ b;
assert(c[] == "foobar");
```

## Legacy: incrementRefCount()

For edge cases, the `incrementRefCount()` method is still available:

```d
/// Manually increment ref count (for edge cases)
/// Note: Only affects heap-allocated data, not SBO
void incrementRefCount() @trusted @nogc nothrow {
    if (isHeap() && _payload.heap) {
        _payload.heap.refCount++;
    }
}
```

In most cases, you should **not need to call this method** - the postblit constructor handles everything automatically.

## Memory Initialization

HeapData zero-initializes allocated memory using `memset`. This prevents garbage values in uninitialized struct fields from causing issues:

```d
static HeapData create(size_t initialCapacity = 0) @trusted @nogc nothrow {
    HeapData h;
    h._flags = 0;   // Ensure flags are initialized
    h._length = 0;

    if (initialCapacity > SBO_SIZE) {
        h._payload.heap = HeapPayload.create(cap);
        h.setHeap(true);
    }
    // Otherwise uses SBO - no allocation needed

    return h;
}
```

## Assignment Operator

HeapData provides a single assignment operator that handles both lvalue and rvalue assignments efficiently:

```d
void opAssign(HeapData rhs) @trusted @nogc nothrow {
    // Decrement old ref count and free if needed
    if (isHeap() && _payload.heap) {
        if (--_payload.heap.refCount == 0) {
            free(_payload.heap);
        }
    }

    // Take ownership from rhs (rhs was copied via postblit)
    _length = rhs._length;
    _flags = rhs._flags;

    if (rhs.isHeap()) {
        _payload.heap = rhs._payload.heap;
        rhs._payload.heap = null;  // Prevent rhs destructor from freeing
        rhs.setHeap(false);
    } else {
        _payload.small = rhs._payload.small;  // Copy SBO data
    }
}
```

When called with an lvalue, D invokes the postblit constructor on `rhs` first, incrementing the ref count. The assignment then takes ownership of the copied reference. This unified approach keeps the code simpler while handling all cases correctly.

## Accessing HeapString Content

Use the slice operator `[]` to get a `const(char)[]` from a HeapString:

```d
HeapString hs = toHeapString("hello");

// Get slice for use with string functions
const(char)[] slice = hs[];

// Pass to functions expecting const(char)[]
writeln(hs[]);
```

## Comparing HeapStrings

HeapData provides `opEquals` for convenient comparisons without needing the slice operator:

```d
HeapString hs = toHeapString("hello");

// Direct comparison with string literal
if (hs == "hello") { /* ... */ }

// Comparison with another HeapString
HeapString hs2 = toHeapString("hello");
if (hs == hs2) { /* ... */ }

// Negation works too
if (hs != "world") { /* ... */ }
```

## Best Practices

1. **Use slice operator `[]`** to access HeapString content for functions expecting `const(char)[]`
2. **Prefer FixedArray** when the maximum size is known at compile time
3. **Let SBO work for you** - short strings are automatically optimized
4. **Use `isValid()` in debug assertions** to catch memory corruption early

```d
// Access content with slice operator
HeapString hs = toHeapString("hello");
writeln(hs[]);  // Use [] to get const(char)[]

// Compare directly (opEquals implemented)
if (hs == "hello") { /* ... */ }

// Use concatenation for building strings
auto result = toHeapString("Error: ") ~ message ~ " at line " ~ lineNum;

// Debug validation
assert(hs.isValid(), "HeapString memory corruption detected");
```

### What You Don't Need to Do

With the current implementation, you **don't need to**:
- Call `incrementRefCount()` before returning structs (postblit handles this)
- Write explicit postblit or copy constructors for structs containing HeapString (D calls nested postblits automatically)
- Write explicit assignment operators for structs containing HeapString (D handles this)
- Worry about heap allocation for short strings (SBO handles this)
- Make two allocations for ref count and data (combined allocation)
- Manually track reference counts when passing structs through containers

## Debugging Memory Issues

If you encounter heap corruption or use-after-free:

1. **Enable debug mode**: Compile with `-version=DebugHeapData` for extra validation
2. **Use `isValid()` checks**: Add assertions to catch corruption early
3. **Check struct literals**: Replace with field-by-field assignment
4. **Verify initialization**: Ensure HeapData is properly initialized before use
5. **Check `refCount()`**: Use the debug method to inspect reference counts (returns 0 for SBO)

### Debug Mode Features

When compiled with `-version=DebugHeapData`, HeapData includes:
- Double-free detection (asserts if ref count already zero)
- Corruption detection (asserts if ref count impossibly high)
- Creation tracking for debugging lifecycle issues

```d
// Enable debug checks
HeapString hs = toHeapString("test");
assert(hs.isValid(), "HeapString is corrupted");

// Check if using heap (refCount > 0) or SBO (refCount == 0)
if (hs.refCount() > 0) {
    // Heap allocated
} else {
    // Using small buffer optimization
}
```

### Common Symptoms

- Crashes in `malloc`/`free`
- Invalid pointer values like `0x6`, `0xa`, `0xc`
- Double-free errors
- Use-after-free (reading garbage data)
- Assertion failures in debug mode

## Architecture-Specific Details

HeapData adapts to different CPU architectures for optimal cache performance:

| Architecture | Cache Line | SBO Size (chars) | Min Heap Capacity |
|--------------|------------|------------------|-------------------|
| x86-64       | 64 bytes   | ~47              | 64                |
| x86 (32-bit) | 64 bytes   | ~47              | 64                |
| ARM64        | 128 bytes  | ~111             | 128               |
| ARM (32-bit) | 32 bytes   | ~15              | 32                |

## Next Steps

- Review the [Core Concepts](/guide/core-concepts/) for understanding the evaluation pipeline
- See [Extending](/guide/extending/) for adding custom operations
